The three dimensional organization of the genome is emerging as a major
determinant of gene reg- ulation. Advances in chromosome conformation capture
methods (3C) are expanding our repertoire of data sets measuring the three
dimensional organization for multiple cell types and organisms. An impor- tant
challenge is to develop computational methods to interrogate these data to
reveal three-dimensional organization of the genome and how these maps change
across different cell types.
We introduce a clustering based approach to analyze genome-wide contact counts
of pairs of loci and to compare them across different cell types. We examine
different clustering algorithms including Hierarchical, Kmeans and Spectral
using different cluster evaluation criteria. We find that Spectral clus-
tering, which is based on a graph-based representation of the contact count
matrix is significantly better than a simple Hierarchical or Kmeans clustering
approach. We apply our spectral clustering algorithm to published genome-wide
3C data (Hi-C) from six human and two mice cell lines. Our spectral algo-
rithm recovers clusters representing different levels of chromosomal
organization ranging from entire chromosomes within one cluster, chromosomes
split into multiple clusters as well as clusters capturing more than one
chromosome. Several of our clusters are enriched for genomic features such as
gene content, activating and repressive chromatin marks and DNAse1
hypersensitive sites. Most of the clus- ters are similar across different cell
types, however clusters spanning multiple chromosomes are more cell-type
specific. We also observe that the smaller, more gene rich chromosomes group
together in our clusters. Finally, we use our clusters to define
inter-chromosomal interactions in human and mouse embryonic stem (ES) cells
and observe significant conservation between these interactions. In summary,
our clustering based approach provides a promising approach to systematically
compare Hi-C contact count maps across multiple cell types and organisms.
